# Quent: Query Engine Telemetry

A PoC for (distributed) query engine telemetry. The current goal is to write up
a thin vertical slice of the technology stack shown below.

## Model

Quent provides a query engine model onto which engine implementers need to map
the constructs of their engine. The model aims to be generic enough such that it
supports various execution paradigms, including but not limited to:

- local and distributed execution
- sequential and concurrent query execution
- engines operating on asynchronous runtimes
- engines running on heterogeneous systems with non-CPU based compute

For more details, please refer to the model specification:
[model.md](./model.md)

## Technology stack

Quent consists of various composable components, according to the following
layers:

1. **Engine**: the (distributed) query engine to be profiled. Anything for which
   the top-level query can be expressed as a data-flow system processing a
   Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) is a potential candidate.
2. **Instrumentation**: libraries used by target engines to produce telemetry
   events in the engine's native language.

- The API provided by such a library will be used by engine developers to
  instrument their engine.
- Typically wraps around a thin efficient minimal-latency Rust-based layer which
  orchestrastes exporting events.
- May (but not required to) perform (partial) model validation.

1. **Exporter**: provides the means to export telemetry events captured by the
   instrumentation library.

- Exporter implementations would typically exist to export telemetry events in
  arbitrary ways.
- Examples include: a local log file, layered on top of OpenTelemetry logs, as
  Parquet files to a cloud-based object store, or to a database.
- One exporter will be a collector-exporter, which sends telemetry to a
  centralized collector, see below.

1. **(Collector)**: service that collects telemetry events into a single process
   and exports them using arbitrary exporters.

- This is optional because a scalable system may choose to export everything in
  a decentralized manner for performance reasons.
- A less obvious argument for making this optional is that in typical use-cases
  like continuous benchmarking and production, MOST telemetry is never accessed,
  especially if no performance anomalies occur. Therefore, spending cycles on
  collection can be very wasteful.

1. **Analzer**: service that reads raw events, validates the model, and performs
   useful aggregations of bulk events used in visualization.
2. **Web Server**: service that interacts with the analyzer and performs final
   data wrangling for UI interactions.
3. **User Interface**: application facing developers and data engineers using
   the query engine, helps to quickly gain performance insights about queries.

## Running the Quent Server & Simulator

### Docker Compose (recommended)

#### Requirements

- Docker + Docker Compose (or [Podman](https://podman.io/) + [Podman Compose](https://docs.podman.io/en/v5.6.2/markdown/podman-compose.1.html))

#### Steps

Assuming you are running this from the repo root, this will spawn a server and
run the simulator to spam some events at the server. For now :tm:, the server
will store event data in `./data` in `<engine id>.ndjson` format.

1. Build the images:

```bash
docker compose build
```

1. Spawn the containers:

```bash
docker compose up
```

1. Use the server, e.g.:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/analyzer/list_engines -H "Accept: application/json"
```

This should return a list of valid engine UUIDs:

```text
["019ae957-6af3-71a3-b7a9-5b351a83a2b1"]%
```

1. Shut everything down:

```bash
docker compose down
```

For quickly iterating, you can merge step 1 + 2 using
`docker compose up --build`.

## Analyzer Service API

The Analyzer Service (which for now :tm: runs as part of the `quent-server`
executable) provides HTTP endpoints that trigger analysis of raw event files and
delivers information that is validated and easy-to-digest (as in small enough
for snappy interactions through web technologies).

Typically, interactions with the Analyzer start by listing engines it knows, by
hitting: `/analyzer/engine/list`, which returns a JSON array with strings that
represent engine UUIDs.

From there, various other HTTP endpoints (will) exist to continue to explore the
profile of a query engine. (For now this can be figured out from a very nasty
looking [source file](crates/server/src/main.rs) but I will clean this up soon
:tm:).

Type definitions for `application/JSON` type data delivered by those routes can
be generated by running:

```text
cargo build -p quent-server
```

For now, these are checked in to the repository under [this folder](crates/server/bindings).

### Example

After obtaining an engine ID, like so:

```text
curl http://localhost:8080/analyzer/list_engines -H "Accept: application/json"
["019aee29-42a6-79b3-be5f-903f041b4e95"]%
```

one may hit the endpoint providing high-level information about an engine:

```text
curl http://localhost:8080/analyzer/engine/019aee29-42a6-79b3-be5f-903f041b4e95 -H "Accept: application/json"
{"id":"019aee29-42a6-79b3-be5f-903f041b4e95","timestamps":{"init":1764932277849433000,"operating":1764932277849439000,"finalizing":1764932277850016000,"exit":1764932277850022000}}%
```

and then continue down to find all coordinators of said engine:

```text
curl http://localhost:8080/analyzer/engine/019aee29-42a6-79b3-be5f-903f041b4e95/list_coordinators -H "Accept: application/json"
["019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-924b55dd3756","019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-925e254fb669"]%
```

and then continue down to find all queries of said engine:

```text
curl http://localhost:8080/analyzer/engine/019aee29-42a6-79b3-be5f-903f041b4e95/coordinator/019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-924b55dd3756/list_queries -H "Accept: application/json"
["019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-924b55dd3756","019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-925e254fb669"]%
```

and finally arrive at a query:

```text
curl http://localhost:8080/analyzer/engine/019aee29-42a6-79b3-be5f-903f041b4e95/query/019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-9271ce782180 -H "Accept: application/json"
{"id":"019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-9271ce782180","coordinator_id":"019aee29-5659-7f81-80e9-924b55dd3756","timestamps":{"init":1764932277849695000,"planning":1764932277849696000,"executing":1764932277849697000,"idle":1764932277849697000,"finalizing":1764932277849697000,"exit":1764932277849697000}}%
```

... and so forth.

N.B. that the above is a latency-sensitive pattern that will end at some point.
This going back-and-forth with the analyzer is only necessary at these higher
levels because Engines and Coordinators are assumed to be able to run for very
long periods of time. Eventually we want to paginate these endpoints.

This JSON object matches the definition of the `Engine` type in
[this generated source](crates/server/bindings/Engine.ts).
